# Changelog

All notable changes to this project will be documented in this file.

The format is based on [Keep a Changelog](http://keepachangelog.com/en/1.0.0/)
and this project adheres to [Semantic Versioning](http://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html).

## [Unreleased]

### Added

### Changed

### Fixed

## [0.14.1] - 10-11-22

### Added
* `skip_nullability_check_on_flatten` option for `insert_object`,
  `insert_object_many`, `replace_object`, `replace_object_many`.
  `false` by default. By setting the option to `true` you allow
  setting null values to non-nullable fields, which can be useful
  if non-nullable field value is generated by
  [sequence](https://www.tarantool.io/en/doc/latest/reference/reference_lua/box_schema_sequence/create_index/).
  **Warning**: there is no native support for sequences in sharded systems
  since each replicaset has its own sequence. If sequence field is a part
  of the sharding key (which is true by default), choosing the bucket id is
  the sole responsibility of the developer (#328).

### Changed
* Rework `NonInitialized` error message to be more helpful for
  troubleshooting (#326).

## [0.14.0] - 13-09-22

### Added
* Support `vshard_router` option in operations for Cartridge vshard groups
  or non-default vshard routers (#44).

### Changed
* Deprecate using space id in `crud.len` (#255).

## [0.13.0] - 29-08-22

### Added
* `crud.storage_info` function to get storages status (#229).

### Fixed
* Fix specifying `vshard` sharding funcs (#314).

## [0.12.1] - 21-07-22

### Fixed
* Fetching invalid ddl configuration (sharding key for non-existing space)
  is no longer breaks CRUD requests (#308).
* ddl space record delete no more throws error if crud is used (#310).
* crud sharding metainfo is now updated on ddl record delete (#310).

## [0.12.0] - 28-06-22

### Added
* Batch insert/upsert operation
  `crud.insert_many()`/`crud.insert_object_many()`/
  `crud.upsert_many()`/`crud.upsert_object_many()`
  `crud.replace_many()`/`crud.replace_object_many()`
  with partial consistency (#193).

## [0.11.3] - 15-06-22

### Changed
* Optimize `crud.select()` without conditions and with `after`.
* Behaviour of potentially long `select` and `count` calls: a critical log entry
  containing the current stack traceback is created upon such function calls —
  an user can explicitly request a full scan through by passing `fullscan=true`
  to `select` or `count` options table argument in which case a log entry will
  not be created (#276).
* Make select error description more informative when merger
  built-in module or tuple-merger external module is used
  in case of disabled/uninit storage (#229).

### Fixed
* `crud.select()` if a condition is '<=' and it's value < `after`.

  Before this patch:

  tarantool> crud.select('developers', {{'<=', 'id', 3}}, {first = 10, after = rows[5]}).rows
  ---
  - - [2, 401, 'Sergey', 'Allred', 21]
    - [1, 477, 'Alexey', 'Adams', 20]
  ...

  After this patch:

  tarantool> crud.select('developers', {{'<=', 'id', 3}}, {first = 10, after = rows[5]}).rows
  ---
  - - [3, 2804, 'Pavel', 'Adams', 27]
    - [2, 401, 'Sergey', 'Allred', 21]
    - [1, 477, 'Alexey', 'Adams', 20]
  ...

* `crud.select()` filtration by a first condition if the condition is '>'
  or '>=' and it's value > `after`.

  Before this patch:

  tarantool> crud.select('developers', {{'>=', 'id', 5}}, {first = 10, after = rows[2]}).rows
  ---
  - - [3, 2804, 'Pavel', 'Adams', 27]
    - [4, 1161, 'Mikhail', 'Liston', 51]
    - [5, 1172, 'Dmitry', 'Jacobi', 16]
    - [6, 1064, 'Alexey', 'Sidorov', 31]
  ...

  After this patch:

  tarantool> crud.select('developers', {{'>=', 'id', 5}}, {first = 10, after = rows[2]}).rows
  ---
    - [5, 1172, 'Dmitry', 'Jacobi', 16]
    - [6, 1064, 'Alexey', 'Sidorov', 31]
  ...

* `crud.select()` results order with negative `first`.
* `crud.select()` if a condition is '=' or '==' with negative `first`.

  Suppose we have a non-unique secondary index by the field `age` field and a
  space:

  tarantool> crud.select('developers', nil, {first = 10})
  ---
  - metadata: [{'name': 'id', 'type': 'unsigned'}, {'name': 'bucket_id', 'type': 'unsigned'},
      {'name': 'name', 'type': 'string'}, {'name': 'surname', 'type': 'string'}, {'name': 'age',
        'type': 'number'}]
    rows:
    - [1, 477, 'Alexey', 'Adams', 20]
    - [2, 401, 'Sergey', 'Allred', 27]
    - [3, 2804, 'Pavel', 'Adams', 27]
    - [4, 1161, 'Mikhail', 'Liston', 27]
    - [5, 1172, 'Dmitry', 'Jacobi', 27]
    - [6, 1064, 'Alexey', 'Sidorov', 31]
  - null
  ...

  Before this patch:

  tarantool> crud.select('developers', {{'=', 'age', 27}}, {first = -10, after = rows[4]}).rows
  ---
  - []
  ...

  After this patch:

  tarantool> crud.select('developers', {{'=', 'age', 27}}, {first = -10, after = rows[4]}).rows
  ---
  - - [2, 401, 'Sergey', 'Allred', 27]
    - [3, 2804, 'Pavel', 'Adams', 27]
  ...

## [0.11.2] - 23-05-22

### Added
* Make metrics quantile collector age params configurable (#286).
* Add separate `latency_average` and `latency_quantile_recent`
  fields to `crud.stats()` output (#286).

### Fixed
* Preset `stats_quantile_tolerated_error` `crud.cfg` parameter is no
  more lost on configuration update (#284).

## [0.11.1] - 06-05-22

### Added
* Make metrics quantile collector tolerated error configurable (#281).

### Changed
* Change metrics quantile collector default tolerated error
  from 1e-2 to 1e-3 (#281).

### Fixed
* Requests no more fail with "Sharding hash mismatch" error
  if ddl set and bucket_id is explicitly specified (#278).

## [0.11.0] - 20-04-22

**Caution**: Use CRUD 0.11.1 instead of 0.11.0. It fixes
critical bug for some requests (see #278).

### Added
* `crud.count()` function to calculate the number of tuples
  in the space according to conditions.
* Support bucket id calculating using sharding func specified in
  DDL schema or in `_ddl_sharding_func` space.
* Statistics for CRUD operations on router (#224).
* Integrate CRUD statistics with [`metrics`](https://github.com/tarantool/metrics) (#224).
* Added LICENSE file into the repository (BSD-2-Clause).

### Changed
* Optimize select with known bucket_id (#234).
* Deprecate manual sharding schema reload (#212).

### Fixed
* Fix processing storage error for tuple-merger implementation of
  select/pairs (#271).
* Do not change input tuple object in requests.
* Add automatic reload of DDL schema (#212).

## [0.10.0] - 01-12-21

### Added

* CRUD operations calculates bucket id automatically using sharding
  key specified with DDL schema or in `_ddl_sharding_key` space.
  NOTE: CRUD methods delete(), get() and update() requires that sharding key
  must be a part of primary key.

### Fixed

* Use tuple-merger backed select implementation on tarantool 2.10+ (it gives
  less pressure on Lua GC).
* DDL sharding key now can be extracted from select conditions even if
  there are no separate index.

## [0.9.0] - 20-10-21

### Added

* `crud.len()` function to calculate the number of tuples
  in the space for memtx engine and calculate the maximum
  approximate number of tuples in the space for vinyl engine.
* Testing: added integration with service coveralls.io (PR #195).
* Testing: added integration with luacov that allows to generate report with
  code coverage statistics (PR #195).

### Changed

* Names of errors generated by CRUD operations have been unified (PR #184).
* Opmimize `crud.select()` / `crud.pairs()` for one replicaset case (say, when
  `bucket_id` is passed or deducible from conditions). It gives 13% boost on
  the case from #220 (PR #226).

### Fixed

* Ignoring of an error in `crud.pairs()` (#144).
* Damaging of opts table by CRUD methods (#192).
* Ignoring of `bucket_id` option in `crud.select()`/`crud.pairs()` (#220).

## [0.8.0] - 02-07-21

### Fixed

* Invalid results for pagination queries when filtering on
  a part of a composite index

### Added

* Added jsonpath indexes support for queries
* `tuple-merger` module updated to 0.0.2

## [0.7.1] - 2021-06-21

### Fixed

* Compatibility with Tarantool versions that don't support key_def and merger modules.
* Ignoring `opts.first` on `crud.pairs` call
* External `keydef` compatibility with built-in `merger`

## [0.7.0] - 2021-05-27

### Fixed

* Fixed error for partial result option if field contains box.NULL.
* Fixed incorrect ``crud`` results during reverse pagination
  without specifying ``batch_size``.
* Fixed crud roles reload:
  * before this patch reload wasn't fair - reloading `tuple.merger`
    and `tuple.keydef` modules failed, and crud started to use
    `crud.select.compat.select_old` module with naive merger implementation;
  * fair reloading `tuple.merger` and `tuple.keydef` led to the error that was
    fixed by caching loaded module in the special global variable not cleaned
    on reloading roles;
  * ability of using `tuple.merger` and `tuple.keydef` modules now is checked
    by calling `package.search`, built-in `merger` and `keydef` modules are used
    if present in `package.loaded`. It allows to avoid ignoring errors on checking
    modules existing via `pcall(require, '<module_name>')`.
* Fixed some cases when module ignored schema updates.
* Preserve "Bootstrap vshard" button in WebUI operable even if vshard
  roles are hidden explicitly.

### Added

* `cut_rows` and `cut_objects` functions to cut off scan key and
  primary key values that were merged to the select/pairs partial result.
* Functions ``stop()`` for the roles ``crud-storage`` and ``crud-router``.
* Option flag `force_map_call` for `select()`/`pairs()`
  to disable the `bucket_id` computation from primary key.
* `crud.min` and `crud.max` functions to find the minimum and maximum values in the specified index.
* Added support for jsonpath for select.

## [0.6.0] - 2021-03-29

### Fixed

* Fixed not finding field in tuple on `crud.update` if
  there are `is_nullable` fields in front of it that were added
  when the schema was changed for Tarantool version <= 2.2.

* Pagination over multipart primary key.

### Added

* `mode`, `prefer_replica` and `balance` options for read operations
  (get, select, pairs). According to this parameters one of vshard
  calls (`callrw`, `callro`, `callbro`, `callre`, `callbre`) is selected

## [0.5.0] - 2021-03-10

### Fixed

* Fixed not finding field in tuple on ``crud.update`` if
  there are ``is_nullable`` fields in front of it that were added
  when the schema was changed.
* Fixed select crash when dropping indexes
* Using outdated schema on router-side
* Sparsed tuples generation that led to "Tuple/Key must be MsgPack array" error

### Added

* Support for UUID field types and UUID values
* `fields` option for simple operations and select/pairs calls with pagination
  support to get partial result

## [0.4.0] - 2020-12-02

### Fixed

* Fixed typo in error for case when failed to get `bucket_id`
* Fixed select by part of sharding key equal. Before this patch
  selecting by equality of partially specified multipart primary index
  value was misinterpreted as a selecting by fully specified key value.
* Fixed iteration with `pairs` through empty space returned `nil`.

### Added

* `truncate` operation
* iterator returned by `pairs` is compatible with luafun

## [0.3.0] - 2020-10-26

### Fixed

* Select by primary index name
* Fix error handling select with invalid type value
* Get rid of performing map-reduce for single-replicaset operations

### Added

* `crud-router` Cartridge role
* `bucket_id` option for all operations to specify custom bucket ID.
  For operations that accepts tuple/object bucket ID can be specified as
  tuple/object field as well as `opts.bucket_id` value.

### Changed

* CRUD-router functions are exposed to the global scope, so it's possible to call
  crud-operations via `net.box.call`
* `crud.init` is removed in favor to `crud.init_storage` and `crud.init_router`

## [0.2.0] - 2020-10-07

### Fixed

* Select with `==` conditions bugs
* Select with conditions by fields with collations

### Added

* CRUD operations:
 * replace
 * upsert
* Output format for CRUD operations changed to set of rows and metadata
* Insert/replace/upsert methods now accept tuples.
  To process unflattened objects *_object methods are introduced.
* `pairs` accepts `use_tomap` flag to return tuples or objects

### Changed

* `checks` is disabled for internal functions by default
* `limit` option is renamed to `first`
* Reverse pagination (negative `first`) is supported
* `after` option accepts a tuple

## [0.1.0] - 2020-09-23

### Added

* Basic CRUD operations:
  * insert
  * get
  * select
  * update
  * delete
* `pairs` function to iterate across the distributed space
